Transcript of the first presidential debate between President Obama and Republican nominee Mitt Romney, moderated by Jim Lehrer of PBS, Oct. 3, 2012, in Denver.
Source: Federal News Service <SPLIT>JIM LEHRER:<SPLIT> Good evening from the Magness Arena at the University of Denver in Denver, Colorado.
I'm Jim Lehrer of the PBS NewsHour, and I welcome you to the first of the 2012 presidential debates between President Barack Obama, the Democratic nominee, and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee.
This debate and the next three — two presidential, one vice- presidential — are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
Tonight's 90 minutes will be about domestic issues, and will follow a format designed by the commission.
There will be six roughly 15-minute segments, with two-minute answers for the first question, then open discussion for the remainder of each segment.
Thousands of people offered suggestions on segment subjects of questions via the Internet and other means, but I made the final selections, and for the record, they were not submitted for approval to the commission or the candidates.
The segments, as I announced in advance, will be three on the economy and one each on health care, the role of government, and governing, with an emphasis throughout on differences, specifics and choices.
Both candidates will also have two-minute closing statements.
The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent.
No cheers, applause, boos, hisses — among other noisy distracting things — so we may all concentrate on what the candidates have to say.
There is a noise exception right now, though, as we welcome President Obama and Governor Romney.
(Cheers, applause.)
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Let's start the economy, segment one.
And let's begin with jobs.
What are the major differences between the two of you about how you would go about creating new jobs?
You have two minutes — each of you have two minutes to start.
The coin toss has determined, Mr. President, you go first.
<SPLIT>PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:<SPLIT> Well, thank you very much, Jim, for this opportunity.
I want to thank Governor Romney and the University of Denver for your hospitality.
There are a lot of points that I want to make tonight, but the most important one is that 20 years ago I became the luckiest man on earth because Michelle Obama agreed to marry me.
(Laughter.)
And so I just want to wish, Sweetie, you happy anniversary and let you know that a year from now, we will not be celebrating it in front of 40 million people.
(Laughter.)
You know, four years ago we went through the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
Millions of jobs were lost.
The auto industry was on the brink of collapse.
The financial system had frozen up.
And because of the resilience and the determination of the American people, we've begun to fight our way back.
Over the last 30 months, we've seen 5 million jobs in the private sector created.
The auto industry has come roaring back and housing has begun to rise.
But we all know that we've still got a lot of work to do.
And so the question here tonight is not where we've been but where we're going.
Governor Romney has a perspective that says if we cut taxes, skewed towards the wealthy, and roll back regulations that we'll be better off.
I've got a different view.
I think we've got to invest in education and training.
I think it's important for us to develop new sources of energy here in America, that we change our tax code to make sure that we're helping small businesses and companies that are investing here in the United States, that we take some of the money that we're saving as we wind down two wars to rebuild America and that we reduce our deficit in a balanced way that allows us to make these critical investments.
Now, it ultimately is going to be up to the voters, to you, which path we should take.
Are we going to double down on the top-down economic policies that helped to get us into this mess, or do we embrace a new economic patriotism that says, America does best when the middle class does best?
And I'm looking forward to having that debate.
<SPLIT>MR.LEHRER:<SPLIT> Governor Romney, two minutes.
<SPLIT>MR.ROMNEY:<SPLIT> Thank you, Jim.
It's an honor to be here with you, and I appreciate the chance to be with the president.
I am pleased to be at the University of Denver, appreciate their welcome and also the presidential commission on these debates.
And congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your anniversary.
I'm sure this was the most romantic place you could imagine here — here with me, so I — (laughter) — congratulations.
This is obviously a very tender topic.
I've had the occasion over the last couple of years of meeting people across the country.
I was in Dayton, Ohio, and a woman grabbed my arm, and she said, I've been out of work since May.
Can you help me?
Ann yesterday was a rally in Denver, and a woman came up to her with a baby in her arms and said, Ann, my husband has had four jobs in three years, part-time jobs.
He's lost his most recent job, and we've now just lost our home.
Can you help us?
And the answer is yes, we can help, but it's going to take a different path, not the one we've been on, not the one the president describes as a top-down, cut taxes for the rich.
That's not what I'm going to do.
My plan has five basic parts.
One, get us energy independent, North American energy independent.
That creates about four million jobs.
Number two, open up more trade, particularly in Latin America; crack down on China if and when they cheat.
Number three, make sure our people have the skills they need to succeed and the best schools in the world.
We're far away from that now.
Number four, get us to a balanced budget.
Number five, champion small business.
It's small business that creates the jobs in America.
And over the last four years small-business people have decided that America may not be the place to open a new business, because new business startups are down to a 30-year low.
I know what it takes to get small business growing again, to hire people.
Now, I'm concerned that the path that we're on has just been unsuccessful.
The president has a view very similar to the view he had when he ran four years ago, that a bigger government, spending more, taxing more, regulating more — if you will, trickle-down government would work.
That's not the right answer for America.
I'll restore the vitality that gets America working again.
Thank you.
<SPLIT>MR.LEHRER:<SPLIT> Mr. President, please respond directly to what the governor just said about trickle-down — his trickle-down approach.
He's — as he said yours is.
<SPLIT>PRESIDENT OBAMA:<SPLIT> Well, let me talk specifically about what I think we need to do.
First, we've got to improve our education system.
And we've made enormous progress drawing on ideas both from Democrats and Republicans that are already starting to show gains in some of the toughest-to- deal-with schools.
We've got a program called Race to the Top that has prompted reforms in 46 states around the country, raising standards, improving how we train teachers.
So now I want to hire another hundred thousand new math and science teachers and create 2 million more slots in our community colleges so that people can get trained for the jobs that are out there right now.
And I want to make sure that we keep tuition low for our young people.
When it comes to our tax code, Governor Romney and I both agree that our corporate tax rate is too high.
So I want to lower it, particularly for manufacturing, taking it down to 25 percent.
But I also want to close those loopholes that are giving incentives for companies that are shipping jobs overseas.
I want to provide tax breaks for companies that are investing here in the United States.
On energy, Governor Romney and I, we both agree that we've got to boost American energy production.
And oil and natural gas production are higher than they've been in years.
But I also believe that we've got to look at the energy source of the future, like wind and solar and biofuels, and make those investments.
So, all of this is possible.
Now, in order for us to do it, we do have to close our deficit, and one of the things I'm sure we'll be discussing tonight is, how do we deal with our tax code, and how do we make sure that we are reducing spending in a responsible way, but also how do we have enough revenue to make those investments?
And this is where there's a difference because Governor Romney's central economic plan calls for a $5 trillion tax cut, on top of the extension of the Bush tax cuts, so that's another $2 trillion, and $2 trillion in additional military spending that the military hasn't asked for.
That's $8 trillion.
How we pay for that, reduce the deficit and make the investments that we need to make without dumping those costs on the middle-class Americans I think is one of the central questions of this campaign.
<SPLIT>MR.LEHRER:<SPLIT> Both of you have spoken about a lot of different things, and we're going to try to get through them in as specific a way as we possibly can.
But first, Governor Romney, do you have a question that you'd like to ask the president directly about something he just said?
<SPLIT>MR.ROMNEY:<SPLIT> Well, sure.
I'd like to clear up the record and go through it piece by piece.
First of all, I don't have a $5 trillion tax cut.
I don't have a tax cut of a scale that you're talking about.
My view is that we ought to provide tax relief to people in the middle class.
But I'm not going to reduce the share of taxes paid by high- income people.
High-income people are doing just fine in this economy.
They'll do fine whether you're president or I am.
The people who are having the hard time right now are middle- income Americans.
Under the president's policies, middle-income Americans have been buried.
They're — they're just being crushed.
Middle-income Americans have seen their income come down by $4,300.
This is a — this is a tax in and of itself.
I'll call it the economy tax.
It's been crushing.
The same time, gasoline prices have doubled under the president, electric rates are up, food prices are up, health care costs have gone up by $2,500 a family.
Middle-income families are being crushed.
And so the question is how to get them going again, and I've described it.
It's energy and trade, the right kind of training programs, balancing our budget and helping small business.
Those are the — the cornerstones of my plan.
But the president mentioned a couple of other ideas, and I'll just note: first, education.
I agree, education is key, particularly the future of our economy.
But our training programs right now, we got 47 of them housed in the federal government, reporting to eight different agencies.
Overhead is overwhelming.
We got to get those dollars back to the states and go to the workers so they can create their own pathways to getting the training they need for jobs that will really help them.
The second area: taxation.
We agree; we ought to bring the tax rates down, and I do, both for corporations and for individuals.
But in order for us not to lose revenue, have the government run out of money, I also lower deductions and credits and exemptions so that we keep taking in the same money when you also account for growth.
The third area: energy.
Energy is critical, and the president pointed out correctly that production of oil and gas in the U.S. is up.
But not due to his policies.
In spite of his policies.
Mr. President, all of the increase in natural gas and oil has happened on private land, not on government land.
On government land, your administration has cut the number of permits and license in half.
If I'm president, I'll double them.
And also get the — the oil from offshore and Alaska.
And I'll bring that pipeline in from Canada.
And by the way, I like coal.
I'm going to make sure we continue to burn clean coal.
People in the coal industry feel like it's getting crushed by your policies.
I want to get America and North America energy independent, so we can create those jobs.
And finally, with regards to that tax cut, look, I'm not looking to cut massive taxes and to reduce the — the revenues going to the government.
My — my number one principle is there'll be no tax cut that adds to the deficit.
I want to underline that — no tax cut that adds to the deficit.
But I do want to reduce the burden being paid by middle-income Americans.
And I — and to do that that also means that I cannot reduce the burden paid by high-income Americans.
So any — any language to the contrary is simply not accurate.
<SPLIT>MR.LEHRER:<SPLIT> Mr. President.
<SPLIT>PRESIDENT OBAMA:<SPLIT> Well, I think — let's talk about taxes because I think it's instructive.
Well, President, you're — Mr. President, you're absolutely right, which is that with regards to 97 percent of the businesses are not — not taxed at the 35 percent tax rate, they're taxed at a lower rate.
But those businesses that are in the last 3 percent of businesses happen to employ half — half — of all of the people who work in small business.
Those are the businesses that employ one quarter of all the workers in America.
And your plan is take their tax rate from 35 percent to 40 percent.
Now, I talked to a guy who has a very small business.
He's in the electronics business in — in St. Louis.
He has four employees.
He said he and his son calculated how much they pay in taxes.
Federal income tax, federal payroll tax, state income tax, state sales tax, state property tax, gasoline tax — it added up to well over 50 percent of what they earned.
And your plan is to take the tax rate on successful small businesses from 35 percent to 40 percent.
The National Federation of Independent Businesses has said that will cost 700,000 jobs.
I don't want to cost jobs.
My priority is jobs.
And so what I do is I bring down the tax rates, lower deductions and exemptions — the same idea behind Bowles-Simpson, by the way.
Get the rates down, lower deductions and exemptions to create more jobs, because there's nothing better for getting us to a balanced budget than having more people working, earning more money, paying — (chuckles) — more taxes.
That's by far the most effective and efficient way to get this budget balanced.
(Cheers, applause.)
